--- Hepatic_Agent_Data_Report (1) (1).docx ---
MULTI-ORGAN DIGITAL TWIN SANDBOX
Hepatic (Liver) Agent
Data Collection and Reference Report: physiology, drug metabolism, diseases, scoring systems, and correlations with the cardiovascular, renal and respiratory agents
Assigned organ
Hepatic (liver)
Prepared by
Muhammad Hassa
Document type
Reference report for team use. Educational purposes only, not for clinical decisions
Contents
1. Introduction and Scope
2. Liver Anatomy and Physiology
3. Laboratory Reference Values and How to Read Them
4. Hepatic Drug Metabolism (Ibuprofen and Acetaminophen)
5. Liver Diseases
5.1 Drug-induced liver injury    5.2 Acetaminophen hepatotoxicity    5.3 Ibuprofen and NSAID injury
5.4 Viral hepatitis    5.5 MASLD, MetALD and alcohol-related disease    5.6 Autoimmune and biliary
5.7 Genetic and metabolic    5.8 Cirrhosis and portal hypertension    5.9 Acute and acute-on-chronic failure
5.10 Ischaemic hepatitis and congestion    5.11 Hepatic encephalopathy    5.12 Tumours
6. Scoring Systems and Clinical Criteria
7. Correlations Between the Liver and the Other Organs
7.1 Liver and kidney    7.2 Liver and heart    7.3 Liver and lungs    7.4 Acid-base links    7.5 Causal chains
8. Hepatic Agent: Data Specification for the Developers
9. Where to Find More Data
10. Checklist for the Team
11. Glossary of Abbreviations
12. References
1. Introduction and Scope
1.1 Purpose of this document
This report collects the medical and physiological data needed to build the Hepatic (Liver) Agent of the Multi-Organ Digital Twin Sandbox. It covers liver physiology, reference laboratory values, drug metabolism, liver diseases, scoring systems, and the correlations between the liver and the other three organ agents (Cardiovascular, Renal and Respiratory). Developers can take numbers, thresholds and cause-and-effect rules from it without searching further.
1.2 Where the Hepatic Agent sits in the twin
Each organ is an autonomous agent with its own state and rules. Agents exchange signals every simulation step. The table lists the signals the Hepatic Agent needs and the signals it publishes.
Direction
Signal
Other agent
Why it matters
Input
Cardiac output, MAP, hepatic blood flow
Cardiovascular
Liver receives about 25% of cardiac output. Low flow causes ischaemic injury and slows clearance of high-extraction drugs.
Input
Oxygen delivery (CO x arterial O2 content), SaO2
Respiratory / Cardiovascular
Hypoxia or shock drives ischaemic hepatitis and lactate production.
Input
GFR, urine output
Renal
Drug metabolites made by the liver are excreted by the kidney. Poor GFR means accumulation.
Input
Stress events: drug doses (ibuprofen, acetaminophen), fasting, alcohol
User interface
Doses and patient state set what the liver must process.
Output
Ibuprofen plasma level and metabolite flux
Renal
Metabolites go to the kidney. Ibuprofen blocks renal prostaglandins and lowers GFR when the patient is volume depleted.
Output
Lactate clearance, blood lactate
Respiratory, Renal
Raised lactate causes metabolic acidosis, which drives hyperventilation and changes potassium and bicarbonate handling.
Output
Vascular tone change in advanced liver disease (low SVR)
Cardiovascular
Cirrhosis and liver failure cause systemic vasodilation, lower blood pressure and a hyperdynamic circulation.
Output
Liver status: ALT, AST, bilirubin, INR, albumin, ammonia
All agents / user interface
Injury and synthetic-function markers that the dashboard and risk report display.
1.3 Scope and disclaimer
The twin is an educational simulation. It uses one idealised patient per profile, not individual patient data. Nothing in this document is a clinical recommendation, and no number from it should be used for real dosing decisions.
1.4 How the evidence was gathered
Key facts that change over time or are often misquoted were checked against current sources in October 2026: the 2023 renaming of NAFLD to MASLD, the MELD 3.0 formula, acetaminophen toxic-dose thresholds and the nomogram, the criteria for hepatorenal syndrome and hepatopulmonary syndrome, ALT reference limits, and the evidence on ibuprofen liver injury. Other material (basic physiology, standard reference ranges, pharmacokinetics, disease descriptions) follows standard textbooks. Source numbers in square brackets point to Section 12. Laboratory reference ranges differ between laboratories, so ranges here are typical values.
Before you submit: cross-check any number you plan to quote in a viva against the cited textbook or guideline. Examiners will ask where a value came from.
2. Liver Anatomy and Physiology
2.1 Key facts
Size and position
Largest internal organ, about 1.2 to 1.5 kg in an adult (roughly 2% of body weight), in the right upper abdomen under the diaphragm [R1, R2].
Dual blood supply
Portal vein supplies about 70 to 75% of liver blood flow (nutrient-rich, partly deoxygenated blood from gut and spleen). Hepatic artery supplies about 25 to 30% (oxygenated). Each supplies roughly half of the liver's oxygen [R1].
Total hepatic blood flow
About 1.5 L/min at rest, which is 25 to 30% of cardiac output [R1].
Blood reservoir
The liver holds about 10% of total blood volume (roughly 500 mL) and can release a large part of it into the circulation during haemorrhage or hypovolaemia. This links the liver to cardiovascular compensation [R1].
Hepatic arterial buffer response
When portal flow falls, adenosine accumulates around the arterioles and the hepatic artery dilates to preserve total flow. This protection is weakened in cirrhosis and in severe shock [R2].
Functional unit
The lobule (hexagonal, centred on a central vein) or the acinus (functional model with three zones). See 2.2.
Main cell types
Hepatocytes (about 80% of liver mass, about 60% of cells), Kupffer cells (resident macrophages), hepatic stellate cells (produce scar tissue in fibrosis), sinusoidal endothelial cells, cholangiocytes (bile duct lining) [R2].
Regeneration
The healthy liver regenerates after partial resection or acute injury. Chronic injury replaces regeneration with fibrosis and, finally, cirrhosis.
2.2 Metabolic zonation (important for toxicity)
Zone
Location
Oxygen
Dominant activity
Vulnerability
Zone 1
Periportal
Highest
Gluconeogenesis, urea cycle, beta-oxidation, bile formation
Injured first by some toxins and in viral hepatitis (interface injury)
Zone 2
Mid-lobular
Intermediate
Mixed
Yellow-fever type necrosis (rare)
Zone 3
Pericentral (around central vein)
Lowest
Highest CYP450 content (CYP2E1), glycolysis, glutamine synthesis
Acetaminophen necrosis and ischaemic hepatitis start here (centrilobular necrosis)
2.3 Functions of the liver
Function group
What the liver does
Key numbers
Marker to measure it
Carbohydrate metabolism
Stores glycogen, releases glucose by glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis, keeps fasting glucose stable
Glycogen store about 80 to 100 g, depleted in roughly 24 h of fasting
Blood glucose (low in acute liver failure)
Lipid metabolism
Makes lipoproteins and cholesterol, oxidises fatty acids, forms ketones and bile acids
Bile output about 600 to 1000 mL/day
Lipid profile, bile acids
Protein synthesis
Albumin, clotting factors (I, II, V, VII, IX, X, XI), transport proteins, angiotensinogen, many others
Albumin about 10 to 15 g/day, half-life about 20 days. Factor VII half-life about 4 to 6 hours
Albumin (slow), INR/PT (fast)
Nitrogen handling
Converts ammonia to urea (periportal) and glutamine (perivenous)
Ammonia from gut protein metabolism, cleared in a single pass in health
Ammonia (limited reliability), urea
Bilirubin handling
Takes up unconjugated bilirubin, conjugates it with UGT1A1, excretes it in bile
Daily bilirubin production about 250 to 400 mg
Total and direct bilirubin
Drug and toxin metabolism
Phase I (CYP450 oxidation) and Phase II (conjugation) enzymes
See Section 4
Drug levels, clearance, ALT/AST after toxic exposure
Lactate clearance
Converts lactate to glucose (Cori cycle) and oxidises it. Clears most of the circulating lactate load
Normal lactate 0.5 to 2.0 mmol/L
Blood lactate
Immune and filtering
Kupffer cells clear bacteria and endotoxin from portal blood
-
Infection markers
Storage and hormonal
Stores vitamins A, D, B12, K, iron and copper. Makes IGF-1 and thrombopoietin, inactivates hormones
-
Ferritin, ceruloplasmin, platelets (low in portal hypertension)
Fluid balance
Albumin supplies most of plasma oncotic pressure, so liver failure shifts fluid out of vessels (oedema, ascites)
Albumin 3.5 to 5.0 g/dL
Albumin, ascites
Twin relevance: the Hepatic Agent needs at least five working parts: (1) drug clearance, (2) injury state (hepatocyte loss, ALT), (3) synthetic function (INR, albumin), (4) lactate clearance, and (5) its dependence on blood flow and oxygen from the other agents.
3. Laboratory Reference Values and How to Read Them
3.1 Standard liver tests
"Liver function tests" is the common name, but ALT, AST and ALP mainly show injury, while albumin, INR and bilirubin show function. The ACG guideline recommends calling them liver chemistries or liver tests [R9].
Test
What it reflects
Typical adult range
Raised or low means
ALT (alanine aminotransferase)
Hepatocyte injury (liver-specific). Half-life about 47 h
Many labs: up to about 40 U/L. ACG healthy limits: 29 to 33 U/L men, 19 to 25 U/L women [R9]
Hepatitis, drug injury, fatty liver, ischaemia. Above 1000 U/L suggests acute viral, toxic or ischaemic injury
AST (aspartate aminotransferase)
Hepatocyte injury, also muscle and heart. Half-life about 17 h
About 10 to 40 U/L
AST:ALT above 2 suggests alcohol-related disease. Ratio above 1 also in cirrhosis
ALP (alkaline phosphatase)
Bile duct and cholestasis, also bone and placenta
About 40 to 130 U/L (varies with age)
Cholestasis, biliary obstruction, infiltrative disease, congestion
GGT
Cholestasis, alcohol, enzyme induction
About 8 to 60 U/L (higher in men)
Confirms liver origin of a raised ALP
Total bilirubin
Bilirubin production and excretion
0.1 to 1.2 mg/dL (about 2 to 21 umol/L)
Jaundice becomes visible above about 2.5 to 3 mg/dL. Reflects both injury and function
Direct (conjugated) bilirubin
Post-conjugation, biliary excretion
Up to about 0.3 mg/dL
Cholestasis or hepatocellular injury. Mostly unconjugated rise in haemolysis and Gilbert syndrome
Albumin
Synthetic function and nutrition. Half-life about 20 days
3.5 to 5.0 g/dL
Low in chronic liver disease (not in acute injury, because of slow turnover)
INR / PT
Synthetic function (factors II, VII, IX, X)
INR 0.8 to 1.2. PT about 11 to 13.5 s
Rises early in acute liver failure. Does not correct with vitamin K in hepatocellular failure
Ammonia (venous)
Nitrogen handling, hepatic encephalopathy
About 15 to 45 ug/dL (11 to 32 umol/L), lab dependent
Raised in liver failure and portosystemic shunting. Poor correlation with encephalopathy grade
Lactate
Tissue hypoxia and hepatic clearance
0.5 to 2.0 mmol/L
Above 2 is hyperlactataemia. Above 4 is severe. Acute liver failure and shock raise it
Platelets
Spleen sequestration, thrombopoietin
150 to 400 x10^9/L
Low in portal hypertension and cirrhosis
Creatinine, sodium (for scores)
Kidney function, circulatory state
Cr 0.6 to 1.3 mg/dL. Na 135 to 145 mmol/L
Needed for MELD scores and for hepatorenal syndrome
3.2 Grading the size of an ALT/AST rise
Grade
Rise above upper limit of normal (ULN)
Typical causes
Mild
Less than 5 x ULN
Fatty liver (MASLD), chronic hepatitis B/C, alcohol, many drugs
Moderate
5 to 15 x ULN
Acute hepatitis, autoimmune hepatitis, drug injury
Severe
More than 15 x ULN (often 1000 U/L or higher)
Acute viral hepatitis, acetaminophen toxicity, ischaemic hepatitis, autoimmune flare, bile duct stone passage
3.3 Pattern of injury: the R ratio
R = (ALT / ULN of ALT) divided by (ALP / ULN of ALP). It separates the three patterns [R20]:
R value
Pattern
Meaning
5 or more
Hepatocellular
Cell injury dominates (viral, toxic, ischaemic). ALT/AST high
2 to 5
Mixed
Both cell injury and bile duct injury
2 or less
Cholestatic
Bile flow problem. ALP/GGT high
3.4 Useful patterns
Ischaemic hepatitis: ALT and AST jump to more than 1000 U/L within 24 to 48 hours of hypotension or hypoxia, with very high LDH (ALT/LDH ratio below about 1.5). They fall quickly, often by half in 72 hours, and return toward normal within 7 to 10 days.
Acetaminophen toxicity: ALT rises from about 12 to 24 hours, peaks at 72 to 96 hours, often in the thousands, with INR rising in step.
Alcohol-related hepatitis: AST:ALT above 2, AST rarely above 300 to 400 U/L, raised GGT and bilirubin.
Cirrhosis: transaminases may be normal. Look for low albumin, raised INR, low platelets, raised bilirubin.
Congestive hepatopathy (heart failure): ALP, GGT and bilirubin rise more than ALT.
Hy's law (drug injury): ALT above 3 x ULN with bilirubin above 2 x ULN, without initial cholestasis and without another cause, carries about a 10% or higher risk of death or transplant [R20].
4. Hepatic Drug Metabolism (Ibuprofen and Acetaminophen)
4.1 Basic principles
Phase I (functionalisation): cytochrome P450 enzymes oxidise drugs. Main isoforms: CYP3A4 (largest share, handles about half of drugs), CYP2D6, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP1A2 and CYP2E1. Highest activity is in zone 3 [R4].
Phase II (conjugation): UGT (glucuronidation), SULT (sulfation), GST (glutathione), NAT (acetylation). Products are water soluble and leave in bile or urine [R4].
First-pass effect: after oral dosing, the portal blood passes through the liver before reaching the systemic circulation. High-extraction drugs lose much of the dose here.
Hepatic clearance (well-stirred model): CL(H) = Q x fu x CLint / (Q + fu x CLint), where Q is hepatic blood flow, fu the unbound fraction and CLint the intrinsic enzyme capacity. The extraction ratio E = CL(H) / Q [R4].
Drug type
Extraction ratio
Clearance depends mainly on
Effect of shock / low flow
Effect of liver disease
High extraction
Above about 0.7
Hepatic blood flow
Clearance falls sharply
Reduced by shunting and flow loss
Low extraction
Below about 0.3
Enzyme capacity and protein binding
Small effect
Reduced by loss of enzyme activity (cirrhosis, hepatocyte loss)
Both ibuprofen (low extraction) and acetaminophen (low to intermediate extraction) depend mainly on enzyme capacity, so their clearance falls when hepatocytes are lost or enzymes are inhibited.
Factors that change hepatic drug handling
Factor
Effect
Cirrhosis
Fewer functioning hepatocytes, lower CYP activity, portosystemic shunting (higher bioavailability of high-extraction drugs), low albumin (higher free fraction of highly bound drugs)
Age
Liver blood flow and mass decline with age, so clearance of many drugs falls modestly
Fasting / malnutrition
Depletes glutathione and glycogen, which raises acetaminophen toxicity risk
Alcohol
Acute use competes for enzymes. Chronic use induces CYP2E1 and depletes glutathione
Genetics
CYP2C9*2 and *3 variants lower ibuprofen clearance. UGT1A1 variants cause Gilbert syndrome
Interacting drugs
Enzyme inducers (rifampicin, carbamazepine) raise NAPQI formation. Inhibitors (fluconazole) slow CYP2C9 drugs
Kidney disease
Metabolites accumulate. Some non-renal clearance is reduced in advanced CKD
4.2 Ibuprofen
Parameter
Typical value
Note
Class and action
Propionic acid NSAID. Reversible inhibition of COX-1 and COX-2
Lowers prostaglandin synthesis (pain, fever, inflammation, and renal vasodilation)
Bioavailability
Above 80%
Rapid absorption
Time to peak (Tmax)
About 1 to 2 h
Faster on an empty stomach
Peak concentration after 400 mg
About 25 to 45 mg/L
Dose proportional in the usual range
Volume of distribution
About 0.1 to 0.2 L/kg (7 to 14 L in a 70 kg adult)
Small, because drug is highly protein bound
Protein binding
About 99% (mainly albumin)
Low albumin raises the free fraction
Elimination half-life
About 2 h (range 1.8 to 2.5 h)
Prolonged in liver or severe kidney disease
Clearance
About 3.5 to 4.5 L/h in a healthy adult
Low-extraction drug
Metabolism
CYP2C9 (main) and CYP2C8 to hydroxy- and carboxy-ibuprofen, plus acyl glucuronidation
R-enantiomer partly converted to active S-enantiomer
Excretion
More than 90% of the dose in urine as metabolites within about 24 h. Less than 1% unchanged
Metabolites go to the Renal Agent
Usual doses (adult)
Over-the-counter: 200 to 400 mg every 4 to 6 h, maximum 1200 mg/day. Prescription: up to 3200 mg/day (US labelling)
Dose limits are used for warnings in the twin
Overdose bands (toxicology references)
Under about 100 mg/kg: usually asymptomatic. About 100 to 400 mg/kg: GI upset, drowsiness, possible acidosis. Above about 400 mg/kg: severe toxicity (acidosis, renal injury, CNS depression)
Approximate ranges, treat as indicative
Pharmacodynamics that matter to the twin
Emax model for COX inhibition: inhibition = Emax x C / (EC50 + C). Plasma concentrations after normal doses (20 to 40 mg/L) give high COX inhibition. The twin links this to renal prostaglandin loss.
Renal effect: prostaglandins (PGE2, PGI2) dilate the afferent arteriole and protect GFR when angiotensin II and sympathetic tone are high (dehydration, heart failure, cirrhosis, CKD). NSAIDs remove this protection and can cause acute kidney injury. See Section 7.1.
Blood pressure: NSAIDs cause sodium and water retention and a small rise in blood pressure (a few mmHg).
Liver effect: direct liver toxicity at normal doses is very rare (Section 5.3).
4.3 Acetaminophen (paracetamol)
Parameter
Typical value
Note
Bioavailability
About 85 to 98% orally
Absorption faster for immediate-release tablets, slower in overdose and with extended-release forms
Time to peak (Tmax)
About 0.5 to 2 h
Can be delayed in large overdose
Peak after 1 g
About 10 to 20 mg/L
Typical therapeutic range of the plasma concentration is about 5 to 20 mg/L
Volume of distribution
About 0.9 L/kg
Total body water
Protein binding
About 10 to 25%
Low
Half-life
About 1.5 to 3 h in health. Longer in overdose and liver injury (over 4 h)
A half-life above 4 h suggests a high risk of hepatotoxicity
Clearance
About 0.3 L/h/kg (about 5 mL/min/kg)
Low to intermediate extraction
Metabolic pathways at therapeutic doses
Pathway
Share of dose
Enzyme
Product
Behaviour at high dose
Glucuronidation
About 50 to 60%
UGT1A1, 1A6, 1A9, 2B15
APAP-glucuronide (urine)
Partly saturable but high capacity
Sulfation
About 25 to 35%
SULT1A1, 1A3/4, 1E1
APAP-sulfate (urine)
Saturates early, so more drug goes to oxidation
Oxidation
About 5 to 10%
CYP2E1 (main), 1A2, 3A4
NAPQI (reactive)
Share can rise to about 15% or more
Unchanged renal
About 1 to 5%
-
Parent drug in urine
Depends on GFR
Mechanism of toxicity (NAPQI and glutathione)
NAPQI is a reactive quinone. Normally it is neutralised at once by glutathione (GSH) through glutathione-S-transferase, then excreted as cysteine and mercapturic acid conjugates [R15].
Hepatic GSH concentration is about 5 to 10 mmol/L. When about 70% of the store is used up (GSH below about 30% of normal), NAPQI binds to cell proteins, especially in mitochondria.
Result: mitochondrial dysfunction, oxidative stress, activation of JNK, and centrilobular (zone 3) necrosis. Cell contents (ALT, AST) leak into blood [R10].
Risk factors: acute overdose, fasting or malnutrition (low GSH), chronic heavy alcohol (CYP2E1 induction plus low GSH), enzyme-inducing drugs, repeated supratherapeutic dosing (the "therapeutic misadventure").
Dose thresholds used in references
Situation (adults)
Threshold
Source
Usual maximum daily dose
4 g/day. Many authorities advise 2 to 3 g/day for chronic use, chronic alcohol use, malnutrition or cirrhosis
[R10, R2]
Acute single ingestion considered toxic
200 mg/kg or 10 g, whichever is less. 150 mg/kg (or about 7.5 g in adults) is the usual trigger for treatment when a level is not available
[R10, R11]
Repeated supratherapeutic ingestion
150 mg/kg/day or 6 g/day (whichever is less) over 24 h or more, or 100 mg/kg/day over 72 h or more
[R10]
Acute overdose definition
Entire ingestion within one 8-hour period
[R10]
Therapeutic-dose caveat: controlled studies in healthy adults taking 4 g/day for about two weeks have shown mild, symptom-free ALT rises in a proportion of subjects (Watkins et al., JAMA 2006). The twin can show this as a small, transient ALT rise at the maximum dose, but not as liver failure.
Clinical course of acute overdose
Stage
Time after ingestion
Features
Labs
I
0.5 to 24 h
Nausea, vomiting, malaise, or no symptoms
Normal. Drug level useful
II
24 to 72 h
Right upper quadrant pain, tender liver, symptoms may ease
ALT/AST rising, INR and bilirubin start to rise, urine output may fall
III
72 to 96 h
Peak liver injury: jaundice, coagulopathy, encephalopathy, possible acute liver failure, kidney injury, lactic acidosis
ALT/AST often in thousands, INR high, lactate and creatinine up, pH may fall
IV
4 days to 2 weeks
Recovery or death. Survivors normally recover fully, with no chronic damage
Labs normalise
Rumack-Matthew nomogram and treatment
The nomogram applies to a single acute ingestion with a level taken 4 or more hours after ingestion. It must not be used for repeated or chronic ingestion [R10, R11]. The treatment line starts at 150 ug/mL (mg/L) at 4 h and falls to 4.7 ug/mL at 24 h, halving about every 4 hours:
Hours after ingestion
4
6
8
10
12
16
20
24
Treatment-line level (mg/L)
150
106
75
53
37.5
18.8
9.4
4.7
Antidote: N-acetylcysteine (NAC), a glutathione precursor. Best started within 8 hours of ingestion, still useful later. Intravenous regimen: 150 mg/kg over 1 h, 50 mg/kg over 4 h, then 100 mg/kg over 16 h. Oral regimen: 140 mg/kg load, then 70 mg/kg every 4 h for 17 doses [R10, R11].
Activated charcoal if within about 1 to 2 hours of a large ingestion.
King's College criteria (acetaminophen acute liver failure, transplant referral): arterial pH below 7.30 after resuscitation, or all three of INR above 6.5, creatinine above 3.4 mg/dL and grade III to IV encephalopathy. Raised lactate (about 3 to 3.5 mmol/L or more after resuscitation) adds prognostic information [R16].
4.4 Comparison table
Property
Ibuprofen
Acetaminophen
Main liver risk
Idiosyncratic injury, very rare. Overdose probably direct toxicity
Dose-dependent (intrinsic) injury through NAPQI and glutathione depletion
Main non-liver risk
Kidney (especially with dehydration), stomach and bleeding, blood pressure
Kidney injury in severe overdose
Metabolism
CYP2C9/2C8 oxidation and glucuronidation
Glucuronidation, sulfation (saturable), CYP2E1 to NAPQI
Half-life
About 2 h
About 2 to 3 h
Protein binding
About 99%
About 10 to 25%
Antidote
None specific. Supportive care
N-acetylcysteine
Safe in cirrhosis?
No. Kidney injury, diuretic resistance, bleeding risk
Commonly accepted at up to about 2 g/day
4.5 Other hepatotoxic drugs (for later extensions)
Amoxicillin-clavulanate: the most common cause of idiosyncratic drug injury in Western series.
Anti-tuberculosis drugs (isoniazid, rifampicin, pyrazinamide): a very common cause of drug injury in South Asia.
Others: statins (rare), methotrexate, valproate, amiodarone, azathioprine, anabolic steroids, and herbal or dietary supplements.
5. Liver Diseases
Each disease is summarised in the same format: definition, causes, mechanism, clinical and laboratory picture, severity, management in outline, and what it means for the digital twin.
5.1 Drug-induced liver injury (DILI)
Definition
Liver injury caused by a drug, herbal product or supplement. Intrinsic DILI is dose dependent and predictable (acetaminophen). Idiosyncratic DILI is rare, unpredictable and not clearly dose dependent (amoxicillin-clavulanate, isoniazid, many NSAIDs) [R20].
Case definition (consensus)
Any one of: ALT of 5 x ULN or more; ALP of 2 x ULN or more; ALT of 3 x ULN or more with bilirubin above 2 x ULN [R20].
Pattern
Hepatocellular, cholestatic or mixed, by the R ratio (Section 3.3).
Risk markers
Hy's law (ALT above 3 x ULN plus bilirubin above 2 x ULN, no cholestasis, no other cause) predicts a risk of about 10% or more of death or transplant. Causality is assessed with the RUCAM scale.
Management
Stop the drug. Supportive care. N-acetylcysteine for acetaminophen and, in early non-acetaminophen acute liver failure, as an adjunct. Corticosteroids only in selected immune-allergic cases. Avoid re-exposure.
Twin relevance
Acetaminophen is modelled mechanistically (Section 4.3). Ibuprofen liver injury can be an optional low-probability event, not a default outcome.
5.2 Acetaminophen hepatotoxicity
Definition
Dose-dependent hepatocellular necrosis from NAPQI after glutathione depletion. Leading cause of acute liver failure in the United States and the United Kingdom [R10, R16].
Causes / risk factors
Intentional or accidental overdose, repeated supratherapeutic dosing, fasting, chronic alcohol use, malnutrition, enzyme inducers.
Mechanism
Sulfation saturates, more drug is oxidised by CYP2E1 to NAPQI, glutathione runs out, NAPQI binds mitochondrial proteins, zone 3 necrosis (Section 4.3).
Clinical picture
Four stages (Section 4.3): symptom-free or nausea, then liver pain, then peak injury at 72 to 96 h, then recovery or failure.
Key markers
Plasma acetaminophen level on the Rumack-Matthew nomogram, ALT/AST, INR, bilirubin, lactate, creatinine, pH, phosphate.
Severity
ALT above 1000 U/L is significant injury. Acute liver failure is INR of 1.5 or more with encephalopathy. King's College criteria guide transplant referral.
Management
N-acetylcysteine, charcoal if early, supportive care, intensive care and transplant for failure.
Twin relevance
Primary mechanistic hepatic scenario. Needs GSH pool, NAPQI formation fraction, hepatocyte loss, ALT and INR kinetics. Fasting profile starts with a smaller GSH pool.
5.3 Ibuprofen and NSAID-related liver injury
Frequency
Clinically apparent injury from ibuprofen is very rare: about 1.0 to 1.6 cases per 100,000 prescriptions and about 1 per 10,000 new users. LiverTox likelihood score A (well defined but very rare) [R5]. NSAIDs as a class account for roughly 10% of drug-induced liver injury cases.
Pattern
Mostly hepatocellular, sometimes cholestatic or mixed, often immune-allergic. Typically in people on rather high daily doses, with onset after days to weeks. A systematic review found 22 cases, with mean cumulative dose about 30 g and onset about 12 days; 11 recovered fully (mean about 14 weeks) and 5 progressed to liver failure, death or transplant [R6].
Overdose
Liver injury in ibuprofen overdose is probably a direct toxic effect, but the mechanism is not well defined [R5].
Management
Stop the drug and avoid re-exposure, since re-challenge after immune-allergic injury usually causes recurrence.
Twin relevance
Ibuprofen is not a major hepatotoxin in this project. Its important effects are renal and haemodynamic. In cirrhosis, however, NSAIDs are avoided because they cause kidney injury, diuretic resistance and bleeding.
5.4 Viral hepatitis
Virus
Transmission
Incubation
Chronic infection?
Main markers
Treatment / prevention
HAV
Faecal-oral (food, water)
About 2 to 6 weeks
No
IgM anti-HAV
Vaccine. Supportive care. Acute liver failure uncommon (under 1%)
HBV
Blood, sexual, mother to child
About 1 to 4 months
About 90% if infected at birth, about 5% in adults
HBsAg, IgM anti-HBc, HBV DNA
Vaccine. Tenofovir or entecavir for chronic disease. Raises HCC risk
HCV
Blood (unsafe injections, transfusion), rarely sexual
About 2 to 12 weeks
About 75 to 85%
Anti-HCV, HCV RNA
Direct-acting antivirals (sofosbuvir-based) cure above 95%. No vaccine. Pakistan carries one of the highest HCV burdens in the world
HDV
Needs HBV to infect
Co-infection or superinfection
Yes, with HBV
Anti-HDV, HDV RNA
Prevent HBV. Bulevirtide in some regions
HEV
Faecal-oral (waterborne outbreaks, genotypes 1 and 2)
About 2 to 8 weeks
Rare (immunosuppressed)
IgM anti-HEV, HEV RNA
Supportive. Severe or fatal in pregnancy
Acute hepatitis: ALT often 1000 U/L or more, jaundice, dark urine, fatigue. Mostly self-limiting except HBV, HCV and HDV in some cases.
Chronic hepatitis (B or C): slow fibrosis over decades, cirrhosis in a fraction, hepatocellular carcinoma risk.
Twin relevance: a chronic hepatitis profile can be modelled as a reduced starting hepatocyte mass or a "fibrosis stage" variable that lowers drug clearance and raises baseline ALT.
5.5 Fatty liver diseases: MASLD, MetALD and alcohol-related liver disease
Nomenclature (2023)
NAFLD is now called MASLD (metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease) and NASH is MASH. MASLD means hepatic steatosis plus at least one of five cardiometabolic risk factors, with little or no alcohol. The umbrella term is steatotic liver disease (SLD). About 98% of people in a European NAFLD cohort met the MASLD criteria [R7].
Five cardiometabolic criteria (adults)
(1) BMI of 25 or more (or waist above 94 cm men / 80 cm women). (2) Fasting glucose of 100 mg/dL or more, type 2 diabetes or treatment. (3) Blood pressure of 130/85 mmHg or more or treatment. (4) Triglycerides of 150 mg/dL or more or treatment. (5) HDL of 40 mg/dL or less (men) / 50 mg/dL or less (women) or treatment [R7].
MetALD
MASLD with higher alcohol intake: about 140 to 350 g/week (women) and 210 to 420 g/week (men) [R7].
Alcohol-related liver disease (ALD)
Steatosis, then alcoholic hepatitis (AST:ALT above 2, bilirubin up, AST below about 400 U/L), then cirrhosis. Intake above about 350 g/week (women) / 420 g/week (men) is the usual ALD range.
Pathophysiology
Insulin resistance, excess fat in hepatocytes, lipotoxicity, inflammation (steatohepatitis), stellate cell activation, fibrosis.
Stages
Steatosis, then MASH, then fibrosis F1 to F4 (F4 is cirrhosis), then possible hepatocellular carcinoma. Fibrosis stage drives outcome.
Laboratory / non-invasive tests
ALT mildly raised or normal. FIB-4 and APRI (Section 6), liver elastography, ultrasound with fatty change, biopsy if uncertain.
Management
Weight loss (7 to 10%), exercise, diet, control of diabetes, blood pressure and lipids. Specific drugs are emerging. Abstain from alcohol in ALD.
Twin relevance
MASLD patients have higher cardiovascular risk and higher risk of CKD. Steatosis and fibrosis can be modelled as a lower starting hepatic function value.
5.6 Autoimmune and biliary diseases
Disease
Key features
Markers
Treatment
Autoimmune hepatitis (AIH)
Immune attack on hepatocytes, more common in women
ALT/AST up, IgG up, ANA, anti-smooth muscle antibody
Prednisolone plus azathioprine
Primary biliary cholangitis (PBC)
Destruction of small bile ducts, fatigue and itching, mostly middle-aged women
ALP up, anti-mitochondrial antibody
Ursodeoxycholic acid
Primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC)
Inflammation and strictures of bile ducts, linked to inflammatory bowel disease, raises cholangiocarcinoma risk
ALP up, beaded ducts on MRCP
Supportive. Transplant for advanced disease
Gallstone disease / obstruction
Stone in the common bile duct, cholangitis (fever, jaundice, pain)
ALP, GGT and direct bilirubin up
ERCP and stone removal, antibiotics
5.7 Genetic and metabolic liver diseases
Disease
Defect
Key findings
Treatment
Wilson disease
ATP7B gene, copper accumulation
Low ceruloplasmin, high urine copper, Kayser-Fleischer rings, liver and neurological signs, young age
Chelation (penicillamine, trientine), zinc
Hereditary haemochromatosis
HFE (usually C282Y), iron overload
High ferritin, transferrin saturation above about 45%
Regular phlebotomy
Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency
SERPINA1 variant, misfolded protein accumulates in the liver
Low alpha-1 antitrypsin level, lung and liver disease
Supportive, transplant
Gilbert syndrome
Reduced UGT1A1 activity (about 30% of normal)
Mild unconjugated hyperbilirubinaemia during fasting or illness, otherwise normal liver tests
None needed. Matters for some drugs
5.8 Cirrhosis and portal hypertension
Definition
Diffuse fibrosis with regenerative nodules and distorted blood flow, the end stage of chronic liver injury.
Causes
Chronic hepatitis B and C, alcohol, MASLD, autoimmune and biliary disease, haemochromatosis, Wilson disease, drugs.
Stages
Compensated (few or no symptoms, normal or near-normal labs). Decompensated (ascites, variceal bleeding, encephalopathy, jaundice).
Portal hypertension
Hepatic venous pressure gradient (HVPG) is normally 1 to 5 mmHg. Above 5 mmHg is portal hypertension. 10 mmHg or more is clinically significant (varices, ascites). 12 mmHg or more carries variceal bleeding risk.
Haemodynamics
Higher resistance inside the liver plus splanchnic vasodilation (nitric oxide) cause a hyperdynamic circulation: higher cardiac output, low systemic vascular resistance, lower mean arterial pressure. The body responds with renin-angiotensin, ADH and sympathetic activation, which causes sodium and water retention and ascites [R2, R3].
Complications
Ascites, spontaneous bacterial peritonitis (ascitic neutrophils of 250/mm3 or more), varices and bleeding, hepatic encephalopathy, hepatorenal syndrome (HRS-AKI), hepatopulmonary syndrome, portopulmonary hypertension, hepatic hydrothorax, coagulopathy and low platelets, hepatocellular carcinoma, cirrhotic cardiomyopathy, malnutrition.
Prognosis
Child-Pugh class A, B and C: one-year survival about 100%, 80% and 45% (commonly cited figures).
Drugs in cirrhosis
Lower enzyme activity, shunting, low albumin and poor renal perfusion all change drug handling. Avoid NSAIDs (kidney injury, bleeding). Acetaminophen is acceptable at low doses (about 2 g/day or less). Sedatives and opioids can precipitate encephalopathy.
Twin relevance
Cirrhosis profile: hepatic function fraction of about 50% or lower, lower baseline MAP, higher baseline cardiac output, higher renal vulnerability (Section 7).
5.9 Acute liver failure and acute-on-chronic liver failure
Acute liver failure (ALF)
INR of 1.5 or more with any degree of encephalopathy in a patient without pre-existing cirrhosis and illness of less than 26 weeks. Subtypes: hyperacute (under 7 days), acute (7 to 28 days), subacute (over 28 days to 26 weeks) [R16].
Causes
Acetaminophen (leading cause in US/UK), viral hepatitis (HEV and HBV important in South Asia), idiosyncratic drugs, autoimmune hepatitis, ischaemia, Wilson disease, Budd-Chiari syndrome, mushroom poisoning (Amanita).
Complications
Cerebral oedema and raised intracranial pressure, coagulopathy, hypoglycaemia, lactic acidosis, acute kidney injury (common), infection, ARDS, vasodilatory low blood pressure (low SVR).
Acute-on-chronic liver failure (ACLF)
Acute decompensation of cirrhosis with failure of one or more organs and high short-term mortality [R17].
Management
Intensive care, treat cause (NAC for acetaminophen), manage ICP, glucose and infection, early transplant listing (King's College criteria).
CLIF-C organ failure score (links the liver to the other three agents)
The EASL-CLIF organ failure score classifies ACLF by six organ systems. It maps almost directly onto the four agents of this project, which makes it useful for the final risk report [R17].
Organ
Score 1
Score 2
Score 3 (organ failure)
Liver (bilirubin)
Below 6 mg/dL
6 to below 12 mg/dL
12 mg/dL or more
Kidney (creatinine)
Below 2 mg/dL
2 to below 3.5 mg/dL
3.5 mg/dL or more, or renal replacement
Brain (encephalopathy)
Grade 0
Grade 1 to 2
Grade 3 to 4
Coagulation (INR)
Below 2.0
2.0 to below 2.5
2.5 or more
Circulation (MAP)
70 mmHg or more
Below 70 mmHg
Vasopressors needed
Respiration (PaO2/FiO2)
Above 300
201 to 300
200 or less
5.10 Ischaemic hepatitis and congestive hepatopathy (the heart-liver link)
Ischaemic hepatitis ("shock liver")
Diffuse zone 3 necrosis after hypoperfusion or hypoxia: cardiac failure, septic or haemorrhagic shock, severe hypoxaemia. ALT/AST climb to above 1000 U/L (often 20 x ULN or more) within 24 to 48 h, LDH is very high, and levels fall rapidly (often by half in 72 h), returning toward normal in 7 to 10 days. Mortality is driven by the underlying cause.
Congestive hepatopathy
Raised central venous pressure (right heart failure, tricuspid disease) causes sinusoidal congestion and a cholestatic pattern (ALP, GGT, bilirubin up, ALT mildly up). Chronic congestion can lead to "cardiac cirrhosis".
Twin relevance
Direct rule linking Cardiovascular and Respiratory outputs to hepatic injury: prolonged low O2 delivery or MAP produces a rapid ALT rise; high venous pressure raises ALP and bilirubin.
5.11 Hepatic encephalopathy
Definition
Brain dysfunction from liver failure or portosystemic shunting. Ammonia and other gut-derived toxins reach the brain.
Triggers
Infection, gastrointestinal bleeding, dehydration and kidney injury, electrolyte disorders (low potassium, low sodium), constipation, sedatives and opioids.
Treatment
Treat the trigger, lactulose, rifaximin.
West Haven grade
Features
0 / minimal
Normal, or abnormal only on psychometric testing
1
Trivial lack of awareness, euphoria or anxiety, shortened attention, sleep reversal
2
Lethargy, disorientation to time, personality change, inappropriate behaviour, asterixis
3
Somnolence to semistupor, responds to stimuli, confused, gross disorientation
4
Coma
5.12 Liver tumours
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC): arises mainly in cirrhosis and chronic hepatitis B. Surveillance with ultrasound (with or without AFP) every 6 months in at-risk patients.
Cholangiocarcinoma: bile duct cancer, risk raised by PSC. Metastases to the liver are more common than primary tumours.
Tumours are out of scope for the 48-hour twin, but should appear in the disease background of the report.
6. Scoring Systems and Clinical Criteria
6.1 Child-Pugh score
Each variable scores 1 to 3 points. Total 5 to 6 is class A, 7 to 9 is class B, 10 to 15 is class C [R18].
Variable
1 point
2 points
3 points
Bilirubin (mg/dL)
Below 2
2 to 3
Above 3
Albumin (g/dL)
Above 3.5
2.8 to 3.5
Below 2.8
INR
Below 1.7
1.7 to 2.3
Above 2.3
Ascites
None
Mild or controlled with diuretics
Moderate to severe or refractory
Encephalopathy
None
Grade 1 to 2 (or controlled)
Grade 3 to 4 (or refractory)
6.2 MELD, MELD-Na and MELD 3.0
MELD predicts 90-day mortality in advanced liver disease and allocates transplant organs. In all versions any value below 1.0 is set to 1.0 before taking the logarithm (ln = natural log) [R8, R18].
Original MELD
MELD = round( 10 x [ 0.957 x ln(creatinine) + 0.378 x ln(bilirubin) + 1.120 x ln(INR) + 0.643 ] ). Creatinine capped at 4.0 mg/dL.
MELD-Na
MELD-Na = MELD + 1.32 x (137 - Na) - [ 0.033 x MELD x (137 - Na) ]. Sodium limited to 125 to 137 mmol/L.
MELD 3.0 (2021)
MELD 3.0 = 1.33 (if female) + 4.56 x ln(bilirubin) + 0.82 x (137 - Na) - 0.24 x (137 - Na) x ln(bilirubin) + 9.09 x ln(INR) + 11.14 x ln(creatinine) + 1.85 x (3.5 - albumin) - 1.83 x (3.5 - albumin) x ln(creatinine) + 6 [R8].
MELD 3.0 limits
Sodium 125 to 137 mmol/L. Albumin 1.5 to 3.5 g/dL. Creatinine maximum 3.0 mg/dL. Bilirubin, INR and creatinine minimum 1.0.
90-day survival (MELD 3.0)
Survival = 0.946 raised to the power exp( 0.17698 x MELD 3.0 - 3.56 ), x 100.
Worked example
Male, bilirubin 3.0 mg/dL, INR 1.8, creatinine 1.5 mg/dL, Na 130 mmol/L, albumin 3.0 g/dL. Original MELD = 21. MELD-Na = 25. MELD 3.0 = 25, estimated 90-day survival about 88%.
MELD is validated for chronic liver disease. It is not used for acute liver failure, where King's College criteria apply.
6.3 Fibrosis scores
FIB-4
FIB-4 = (age in years x AST) / (platelets in 10^9/L x square root of ALT). Below 1.3 (below 2.0 if age 65 or over) makes advanced fibrosis unlikely. Above 2.67 suggests high risk of advanced fibrosis.
APRI
APRI = ((AST / AST upper limit of normal) / platelets in 10^9/L) x 100. Above 0.7 suggests significant fibrosis. Above 1.0 suggests cirrhosis.
6.4 KDIGO acute kidney injury staging (used for the kidney link)
Stage
Serum creatinine
Urine output
1
1.5 to 1.9 x baseline, or rise of 0.3 mg/dL or more within 48 h
Below 0.5 mL/kg/h for 6 to 12 h
2
2.0 to 2.9 x baseline
Below 0.5 mL/kg/h for 12 h or more
3
3.0 x baseline or more, or 4.0 mg/dL or more, or dialysis
Below 0.3 mL/kg/h for 24 h or more, or anuria for 12 h or more
6.5 Other criteria in one place
Criterion
Rule
Hy's law
ALT above 3 x ULN plus bilirubin above 2 x ULN, no cholestasis, no other cause
Acute liver failure
INR of 1.5 or more plus encephalopathy, no prior cirrhosis, illness under 26 weeks
King's College (acetaminophen)
pH below 7.30 after resuscitation, or INR above 6.5 plus creatinine above 3.4 mg/dL plus grade 3 to 4 encephalopathy
King's College (non-acetaminophen)
INR above 6.5, or any 3 of: age under 10 or over 40; drug or indeterminate cause; jaundice to encephalopathy over 7 days; INR above 3.5; bilirubin above 17.5 mg/dL
HRS-AKI
See Section 7.1
Hepatopulmonary syndrome
See Section 7.3
7. Correlations Between the Liver and the Other Organs
This section is the core of the multi-agent design. For each partner organ it lists the mechanisms, the numbers that define them, and the direction and speed of the interaction.
7.1 Liver and Kidney (Hepatic and Renal agents)
Why the two organs are linked
The kidney excretes the water-soluble products of hepatic metabolism. More than 90% of an ibuprofen dose leaves in urine as liver-made metabolites. If GFR falls, these accumulate [R4].
Advanced liver disease causes splanchnic vasodilation, which lowers the effective arterial blood volume. The kidney responds with intense vasoconstriction, sodium retention and, in the extreme, hepatorenal syndrome [R2, R12].
Kidney blood flow in patients with high renin, angiotensin II or sympathetic tone depends on vasodilating prostaglandins. NSAIDs remove them.
The liver makes angiotensinogen (the RAAS substrate), albumin (plasma volume and oncotic pressure) and the urea precursor pathway.
Types of kidney injury in liver disease and in the twin scenarios
Type
Mechanism
Urine sodium
FeNa
Response to volume
Notes
Pre-renal (volume depletion)
Dehydration, vomiting, diarrhoea, over-diuresis, bleeding
Below 20 mmol/L
Below 1%
Yes
Reversible. Creatinine falls after fluids
NSAID-associated AKI
Loss of prostaglandin-mediated afferent dilation when angiotensin II / sympathetic tone is high
Usually low
Usually below 1%
Partial. Stop drug and give volume
Usually reversible within days. Risk is highest with dehydration, CKD, cirrhosis, heart failure, diuretics, ACE inhibitor/ARB ("triple whammy")
HRS-AKI
Functional renal vasoconstriction in cirrhosis
Very low (often below 10 mmol/L)
Often below 0.2 to 1%
No (after 48 h of albumin)
Diagnosis of exclusion (criteria below)
Acute tubular necrosis (ATN)
Prolonged ischaemia, sepsis, toxins
Above 40 mmol/L
Above 2%
No
Slow recovery (days to weeks). Muddy brown casts
Cholemic nephropathy
Bile pigment casts in severe jaundice
Variable
Variable
No
Seen with very high bilirubin
Hepatorenal syndrome (HRS-AKI): ICA diagnostic criteria [R12]
Cirrhosis with ascites.
AKI by ICA criteria: creatinine rise of 0.3 mg/dL or more within 48 h, or a rise of 50% or more from baseline within 7 days (urine output below 0.5 mL/kg/h for 6 h also counts).
No response after 2 consecutive days of diuretic withdrawal and plasma volume expansion with albumin 1 g/kg/day (maximum 100 g/day).
No shock.
No current or recent use of nephrotoxic drugs (NSAIDs, aminoglycosides, iodinated contrast).
No structural kidney disease: proteinuria below 500 mg/day, fewer than 50 red cells per high-power field, normal renal ultrasound.
Treatment: terlipressin plus albumin (first line), or norepinephrine plus albumin. Terlipressin reverses HRS in only about 40 to 50% of patients. Definitive treatment is liver transplant.
Modelling rule: because the HRS criteria exclude NSAID use, a cirrhotic twin that develops kidney injury after ibuprofen should be labelled "NSAID-associated AKI", not hepatorenal syndrome. Reserve "HRS-AKI" for advanced liver failure without a nephrotoxic trigger.
Other kidney-liver points
Creatinine is unreliable in cirrhosis. Low muscle mass and reduced creatine synthesis lower creatinine, so GFR is overestimated. Bilirubin can interfere with some assays.
Severe acetaminophen overdose can also injure the kidney directly, and kidney injury is a King's College criterion.
Raised potassium, acidosis and fluid overload from a failing kidney worsen encephalopathy and lactate handling.
7.2 Liver and Heart (Hepatic and Cardiovascular agents)
Link
Direction
Mechanism and numbers
Time scale
Cardiac output and blood pressure to liver injury
Cardio to Hepatic
The liver gets 25 to 30% of cardiac output and half its oxygen from the hepatic artery. Sustained hypotension (roughly MAP below 60 to 65 mmHg), cardiac failure or hypoxaemia causes zone 3 necrosis: ischaemic hepatitis (ALT above 1000 U/L, falling by about half in 72 h) [R2, R3]
Hours to 2 days
Venous congestion to liver
Cardio to Hepatic
High right atrial pressure (right heart failure, volume overload) causes sinusoidal congestion. ALP, GGT and bilirubin rise more than ALT
Days to weeks
Hepatic blood reservoir
Hepatic to Cardio
About 10% of blood volume sits in the liver. With sympathetic activation (haemorrhage, standing) a few hundred millilitres return to the circulation, supporting preload [R1]
Seconds to minutes
Hyperdynamic circulation in cirrhosis
Hepatic to Cardio
Splanchnic vasodilation (nitric oxide) lowers systemic vascular resistance and blood pressure, and raises cardiac output and heart rate. Renin-angiotensin, ADH and sympathetic systems are activated to compensate
Chronic
Cirrhotic cardiomyopathy
Hepatic to Cardio
Blunted contractile response to stress, diastolic dysfunction, QT prolongation, even without heart disease. Unmasked by infection, bleeding or procedures
Chronic
Acute liver failure vasodilation
Hepatic to Cardio
Low SVR and hypotension, often needing vasopressors. CLIF circulation failure is MAP below 70 mmHg or vasopressor use
Hours to days
Albumin and plasma volume
Hepatic to Cardio
Low albumin lowers plasma oncotic pressure, fluid moves to tissues (oedema, ascites) and plasma volume falls
Days to weeks
Clotting factors
Hepatic to Cardio
High INR with a failing liver makes haemorrhage more dangerous and harder to compensate
Hours to days
Lactate
Cardio to Hepatic and back
Low cardiac output and low oxygen delivery raise lactate. A failing liver clears it more slowly, so acidosis worsens
Minutes to hours
Drugs
Both
NSAIDs raise blood pressure, worsen heart failure and blunt diuretics. Non-selective beta-blockers in portal hypertension lower heart rate and cardiac output
Hours to days
Metabolic disease
Both
MASLD shares risk factors with cardiovascular disease and carries higher cardiovascular mortality [R7]
Chronic
7.3 Liver and Lungs (Hepatic and Respiratory agents)
Hepatopulmonary syndrome (HPS) [R13]
A pulmonary vascular complication of liver disease. Dilated capillaries and shunts in the lungs cause ventilation-perfusion mismatch and low blood oxygen. It is defined by three parts:
Liver disease and/or portal hypertension.
Evidence of intrapulmonary vascular dilatation (contrast echocardiography or technetium macroaggregated albumin scan).
Abnormal oxygenation: A-a gradient of 15 mmHg or more (20 mmHg or more if older than 64 to 65 years), with or without PaO2 below 80 mmHg on room air.
HPS severity
Criterion
Mild
A-a gradient 15 mmHg or more, PaO2 80 mmHg or more
Moderate
PaO2 60 to 79 mmHg
Severe
PaO2 50 to 59 mmHg
Very severe
PaO2 below 50 mmHg
Typical signs: breathlessness on sitting up (platypnoea), and a fall in PaO2 of more than 4 mmHg or in saturation of more than 5% when moving from lying to upright (orthodeoxia), spider naevi, clubbing. Prevalence in cirrhosis is about 4 to 29%, depending on the criteria used.
Treatment: oxygen supplementation. The definitive treatment is liver transplant.
Other lung-liver links
Link
Direction
Mechanism
Portopulmonary hypertension
Hepatic to Respiratory
Portal hypertension with raised pulmonary artery pressure from vasoconstriction (older definition: mean PAP above 25 mmHg with raised pulmonary vascular resistance and normal wedge pressure; newer guidelines use a lower mean PAP threshold of above 20 mmHg). Opposite of HPS (vasoconstriction, not vasodilation). Strains the right heart [R13]
Hepatic hydrothorax
Hepatic to Respiratory
Ascitic fluid passes through diaphragm defects into the (usually right) chest, causing breathlessness
Ascites and diaphragm
Hepatic to Respiratory
Tense ascites raises the diaphragm and reduces lung volumes
Lactic acidosis
Hepatic to Respiratory
Failing lactate clearance lowers pH and bicarbonate. Chemoreceptors raise alveolar ventilation (Kussmaul breathing) to compensate
Chronic hyperventilation
Hepatic to Respiratory
Mild hypocapnia (respiratory alkalosis) is common in chronic liver disease
Hypoxaemia to liver
Respiratory to Hepatic
Low arterial oxygen and low flow together cause ischaemic liver injury. Oxygen delivery = cardiac output x arterial oxygen content
Respiratory depression to liver
Respiratory to Hepatic
Hypoventilation lowers oxygen supply. Opioids and sedatives accumulate when hepatic clearance is reduced, which prolongs respiratory depression and can precipitate encephalopathy
Acute liver failure to lungs
Hepatic to Respiratory
ARDS, aspiration with encephalopathy, and the CLIF respiratory failure threshold (PaO2/FiO2 of 200 or less)
7.4 Acid-base and metabolic links used by several agents
Lactate: produced when oxygen delivery is critically low, cleared mainly by the liver. Hepatic injury, shock and hypoxia together create lactic acidosis.
Bicarbonate and pH: pH = 6.1 + log10( HCO3 / (0.03 x PaCO2) ). Lactate and kidney failure lower HCO3. The lungs respond by lowering PaCO2.
Potassium: acidosis shifts potassium out of cells. Falling GFR reduces excretion. Hyperkalaemia above 5.5 mmol/L is a warning and above 6.0 mmol/L is critical.
Glucose: the liver sustains fasting glucose. Acute liver failure causes hypoglycaemia. Fasting also depletes glutathione.
7.5 Causal chains for the planned stress events
Scenario A: high-dose ibuprofen plus dehydration (the headline scenario)
Step
Agent
Signal or event
Direction
Time scale
1
Cardiovascular
Fluid loss lowers plasma volume and preload. Heart rate rises, sympathetic tone rises
Plasma volume down, HR up
Minutes to hours
2
Renal
Renin-angiotensin and ADH rise. Afferent arteriole depends on prostaglandins
Angiotensin II up, urine concentrated
30 to 60 min
3
Hepatic
Ibuprofen absorbed, plasma peak about 1 to 2 h, cleared by CYP2C9 and glucuronidation, half-life about 2 h. Metabolites passed to kidney
COX inhibition peaks, metabolites rise
Hours
4
Renal
Prostaglandin loss plus high angiotensin II lowers GFR. Metabolite clearance falls
GFR down, urine output down
Hours
5
Renal
Creatinine rises with a lag (distribution volume and half-time of many hours). Potassium rises
Creatinine up
12 to 48 h
6
Renal to Cardio
Sodium and water retention, higher vascular tone
Blood pressure up
Hours to days
7
All
Overall kidney injury may become tubular if low GFR is prolonged, slowing recovery
AKI persists after drug is gone
Days
The liver in a healthy patient is not injured in this scenario. Its role is the drug clearance rate and the metabolite load. In cirrhosis the same dose causes higher drug exposure and a greater kidney effect.
Scenario B: acetaminophen overdose in a fasting patient
Step
Agent
Signal or event
Time scale
1
Hepatic
Sulfation saturates, CYP2E1 route increases, NAPQI forms. Fasting means low starting glutathione
1 to 8 h
2
Hepatic
Glutathione falls below about 30%, NAPQI binds, hepatocyte death starts in zone 3
4 to 24 h
3
Hepatic
ALT rises from about 12 to 24 h, peaks at 72 to 96 h. INR rises. Lactate clearance falls
1 to 4 days
4
Hepatic to Cardio
Loss of liver function causes vasodilation: SVR down, MAP down
Days
5
Cardio to Renal
Lower MAP and effective volume reduce renal perfusion. Possible AKI
Days
6
Hepatic to Respiratory
Lactic acidosis drives hyperventilation
Hours to days
Scenario C: haemorrhage
Preload falls, cardiac output falls, heart rate and sympathetic tone rise. The liver's blood reservoir releases blood.
Prolonged low flow and low haematocrit lower hepatic oxygen supply. Lactate rises and clearance falls. Ischaemic hepatitis follows if hypoperfusion lasts hours.
Loss and dilution of clotting factors raise INR and worsen bleeding.
Scenario D: respiratory depression (opioid or sedative)
Hypoventilation raises PaCO2 and lowers PaO2 and pH. Hypoxia reduces hepatic oxygen supply.
If liver function is reduced, opioid clearance falls and the effect lasts longer. In cirrhosis, sedatives can trigger encephalopathy.
8. Hepatic Agent: Data Specification for the Developers
This section converts the evidence into the inputs the code needs. Values marked "design choice" are modelling decisions that the team should tune so the validation scenarios in 8.5 behave as expected. Values with a reference number come from the sources.
8.1 State variables and thresholds
Variable
Unit
Healthy baseline (70 kg adult)
Warning
Critical
Basis
Hepatic blood flow
L/min
1.5 (25 to 30% of CO)
Below about 60% of baseline
Below about 40%
Baseline [R1]. Alert levels design choice
Hepatic functional fraction
0 to 1
1.0
Below 0.6
Below 0.3
Design choice. Scales clearance, lactate clearance, synthetic function
ALT
U/L
About 25
Above 120 (3 x ULN of 40)
Above 1000
ULN [R9]. Grading [R9, R20]
AST
U/L
About 25
Above 120
Above 1000
As ALT
Total bilirubin
mg/dL
0.8
Above 2.0 (Hy's law with ALT above 3 x ULN)
Above 6 (CLIF 2), 12 (CLIF 3)
[R17, R20]
INR
ratio
1.0
Above 1.5
Above 2.0 (above 2.5 CLIF 3)
[R16, R17]
Albumin
g/dL
4.2
Below 3.5
Below 2.8
[R18] (Child-Pugh points). Slow variable, half-life about 20 days
Lactate
mmol/L
1.0
Above 2
Above 4
[R16]
Ammonia
ug/dL
About 30
Above about 45 (lab upper limit)
Design choice
Lab dependent
Hepatic glutathione
% of store
100
Below 60
Below 30 (NAPQI binds)
[R10, R15]
Ibuprofen plasma
mg/L
0
Above 50
Above 100
Typical peak after 400 mg is 25 to 45 mg/L. Alert levels design choice
Acetaminophen plasma
mg/L
0
Above the nomogram line at the matching hour
Above line and rising ALT
[R10, R11]
8.2 Pharmacokinetic parameters (ranges to calibrate within)
Parameter
Ibuprofen
Acetaminophen
Source
Oral bioavailability
0.8 to 1.0
0.85 to 0.98
[R4]
Absorption
Tmax 1 to 2 h (first-order rate about 1 to 3 per hour)
Tmax 0.5 to 2 h (first-order rate about 1.5 to 3 per hour)
[R4]
Volume of distribution
0.1 to 0.2 L/kg
About 0.9 L/kg
[R4]
Clearance
3.5 to 4.5 L/h
About 0.3 L/h/kg (about 20 L/h in 70 kg)
[R4]
Half-life
1.8 to 2.5 h
1.5 to 3 h (over 4 h in toxicity)
[R4, R10]
Protein binding
About 99%
10 to 25%
[R4]
Pathway shares at therapeutic dose
Almost all hepatic: CYP2C9/2C8 plus glucuronide. Under 1% unchanged
Glucuronide 50 to 60%, sulfate 25 to 35%, NAPQI 5 to 10%, unchanged 1 to 5%
[R4, R10]
Saturation behaviour
Not clinically important
Sulfation saturates, NAPQI share rises to about 15% or more
[R4, R10]
Hepatic glutathione
-
Concentration about 5 to 10 mmol/L. NAPQI binds when GSH below about 30%
[R10, R15]
PD: COX inhibition
Emax-type curve. EC50 is a design choice, tuned so that therapeutic concentrations give high inhibition
-
Design choice
Maximum doses
1200 mg/day OTC. 3200 mg/day prescription
4 g/day (2 to 3 g/day in at-risk patients)
[R10]
8.3 Rule table (if-then)
No.
Condition
Hepatic Agent action
Basis
1
Single acetaminophen dose of 150 mg/kg or more (about 7.5 g in an adult), or 200 mg/kg or 10 g
Flag "potentially toxic". Increase NAPQI formation as sulfation saturates
[R10, R11]
2
Level above treatment line (150 mg/L at 4 h, halving every 4 h) for a single acute ingestion at 4 h or later
Flag "NAC indicated". Do not apply the nomogram to repeated dosing
[R10, R11]
3
Glutathione below about 30% of store
Unneutralised NAPQI binds proteins, hepatocyte loss rate proportional to bound NAPQI
[R10, R15]
4
ALT above 3 x ULN and bilirubin above 2 x ULN, no cholestasis
Flag Hy's law
[R20]
5
INR 1.5 or more with encephalopathy, no prior cirrhosis
Flag acute liver failure. Apply King's College criteria for report
[R16]
6
MAP below about 60 to 65 mmHg or oxygen delivery very low for hours
Ischaemic injury: rapid ALT rise within 24 to 48 h, then fall by about half in 72 h
[R2, R3]
7
Hepatic functional fraction falls
Lower drug clearance, lower lactate clearance, higher INR (hours), lower albumin (days), lower SVR (vasodilation)
[R2, R3]
8
Lactate above 4 mmol/L
Critical flag. Message to Respiratory (acidosis) and Renal (pH, potassium)
[R16]
9
GFR falls
Metabolite clearance falls in proportion, metabolites accumulate
[R4]
10
Cirrhosis profile plus NSAID plus kidney injury
Report as NSAID-associated AKI. Use "HRS-AKI" only if ICA criteria are met without a nephrotoxic drug
[R12]
11
Cirrhosis profile
Lower baseline MAP and SVR, higher CO, lower enzyme capacity, lower baseline albumin and platelets
[R2, R3]
12
Final report
Compute CLIF-style organ scores for liver, kidney, circulation and respiration
[R17]
8.4 Patient-profile modifiers (suggested)
Profile
Effect on the Hepatic Agent
Suggested value
Basis
Healthy adult
Reference
Functional fraction 1.0
-
Compensated cirrhosis (Child-Pugh A)
Lower enzyme capacity and flow
About 0.6 to 0.7
Design choice informed by [R2, R3]
Decompensated (Child-Pugh B)
Further loss
About 0.4 to 0.5
Design choice
Child-Pugh C
Severe loss
About 0.2 to 0.3
Design choice
Fasting / malnutrition
Smaller glutathione store, lower glycogen
GSH store about 40 to 60% of normal
Direction [R10]. Value design choice
Chronic heavy alcohol
CYP2E1 induction (more NAPQI) plus low GSH
Higher NAPQI fraction, lower GSH
Direction [R10]. Values design choice
Elderly
Lower hepatic blood flow and clearance
About 10 to 30% lower clearance
Direction [R4]
CYP2C9 poor metaboliser
Lower ibuprofen clearance
Clearance markedly lower
Direction [R4]
MASLD / obesity
Mildly reduced function, higher baseline ALT
Functional fraction about 0.8 to 0.9
Design choice
8.5 Validation scenarios and expected behaviour
Use these as a test list. If the twin does not reproduce the expected pattern, tune the design-choice parameters, not the literature values.
Scenario
Expected hepatic result
Expected effect on other agents
Ibuprofen 400 mg, healthy, hydrated
Peak plasma about 25 to 45 mg/L, cleared in roughly 8 to 10 h (half-life about 2 h). No liver injury
GFR essentially unchanged. No AKI
Ibuprofen 800 mg every 6 h plus 3 to 4% dehydration, healthy
No hepatic injury. Higher metabolite load
GFR falls, creatinine rises 12 to 48 h later, blood pressure rises
Same, CKD or elderly
No hepatic injury
Larger GFR loss, AKI more likely
Acetaminophen 4 g/day, healthy
GSH preserved. At most a small, transient ALT rise [R19]
No effect
Acetaminophen 20 g, healthy
GSH depleted, ALT above 1000 U/L, peak at 72 to 96 h, INR rises
Possible MAP fall, AKI, lactic acidosis with hyperventilation
Acetaminophen 10 g, fasting vs normal
Fasting patient has worse injury than normal-fed patient at the same dose
As above
Haemorrhage 1.2 L
Lactate rises, clearance falls, INR rises, possible ischaemic ALT rise if prolonged
HR up, MAP and CO down, haematocrit falls after refill
Opioid depression in COPD or cirrhosis
Longer drug effect when function is reduced
PaCO2 above 50 mmHg, SaO2 falls, pH falls
Polypharmacy in cirrhosis (NSAID plus acetaminophen plus dehydration)
Lower clearance, higher exposure, worse injury if acetaminophen high
NSAID-associated AKI, lower MAP
8.6 Simplifications and assumptions to state in the report
One virtual patient per profile, using population-average values.
The liver is modelled as one well-mixed compartment (no zonation), although zone 3 vulnerability is explained in the text.
Hepatocyte loss is the single driver of lower function, ALT release and INR rise.
Ibuprofen is modelled for its kidney and circulation effects, with idiosyncratic liver injury excluded by default.
Albumin changes slowly (half-life about 20 days) and is not expected to move within 48 to 72 hours.
Other organs (brain, gut, endocrine, immune system) are not modelled.
Parameters are literature ranges tuned to match patterns, not fitted to individual patient data.
9. Where to Find More Data
Use these if the team wants real data to compare against the twin outputs or to extend the project.
Resource
What it offers
Use
Indian Liver Patient Dataset (ILPD), UCI Machine Learning Repository
583 patient records (416 liver patients, 167 others): age, sex, bilirubin, ALP, ALT, AST, proteins, albumin, albumin/globulin ratio
Check the plausible spread of liver tests, build simple classifiers
NHANES (US CDC)
Population liver enzymes, elastography and ultrasound-based steatosis data (2017 to March 2020 cycle), plus body measures and chemistry
Baseline distributions, MASLD prevalence
MIMIC-IV (PhysioNet)
De-identified intensive care records with serial ALT, bilirubin, INR, lactate, creatinine, vital signs
Time courses in shock, liver failure and AKI (requires credentialed access)
LiverTox (NIH / NCBI Bookshelf)
Clinical summaries for more than 1,000 drugs and supplements with likelihood scores and injury patterns
Drug injury profiles, ibuprofen and acetaminophen pages
DILIrank (US FDA)
Drugs ranked by drug-induced liver injury concern
Extending the drug list
PubMed / PMC reviews
Review articles and guidelines on each disease
Backing for each cited number
9.1 Textbooks and guidelines to cite in the viva
Guyton and Hall Textbook of Medical Physiology (liver blood flow and function).
Sherlock's Diseases of the Liver and Biliary System (disease detail).
Harrison's Principles of Internal Medicine (diseases and scores).
Goodman and Gilman's Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics (pharmacokinetics).
AASLD, EASL and ACG guidelines (cited in Section 12).
10. Checklist for the Team
Use this to confirm nothing was missed before the hepatic data goes into the code.
Item
Covered in
Status
Liver anatomy, blood flow and zones
Section 2
Done
Functions and which marker shows each
Sections 2.3 and 3
Done
Reference ranges and patterns
Section 3
Done
Drug metabolism principles
Section 4.1
Done
Ibuprofen PK and effects
Section 4.2
Done
Acetaminophen PK, NAPQI, glutathione, nomogram, NAC
Section 4.3
Done
Disease list with mechanisms and markers
Section 5
Done
Scores (Child-Pugh, MELD, MELD-Na, MELD 3.0, FIB-4, APRI, KDIGO, CLIF)
Section 6, 5.9
Done
Liver-kidney correlations including HRS and NSAID kidney injury
Section 7.1
Done
Liver-heart correlations
Section 7.2
Done
Liver-lung correlations including HPS
Section 7.3
Done
Causal chains for each stress event
Section 7.5
Done
Developer specification: variables, thresholds, rules, validation tests
Section 8
Done
Datasets and textbooks
Section 9
Done
Decide units and thresholds shared with the other three agent owners
Team meeting
Open
Agree one common creatinine, MAP and GFR baseline for all agents
Team meeting
Open
Confirm the alert thresholds marked "design choice" in Section 8
Team meeting
Open
11. Glossary of Abbreviations
Term
Meaning
A-a gradient
Alveolar-arterial oxygen difference
ACLF
Acute-on-chronic liver failure
AKI
Acute kidney injury
ALD
Alcohol-related liver disease
ALF
Acute liver failure
ALP / ALT / AST / GGT
Alkaline phosphatase / alanine aminotransferase / aspartate aminotransferase / gamma-glutamyl transferase
APRI / FIB-4
Non-invasive fibrosis scores
CKD
Chronic kidney disease
CLIF-C OF
EASL-CLIF Consortium organ failure score
CO / MAP / SVR / CVP
Cardiac output / mean arterial pressure / systemic vascular resistance / central venous pressure
COX
Cyclooxygenase
CYP
Cytochrome P450 enzyme family
DILI
Drug-induced liver injury
FeNa
Fractional excretion of sodium
GFR
Glomerular filtration rate
GSH / GST
Glutathione / glutathione-S-transferase
HPS / PoPH
Hepatopulmonary syndrome / portopulmonary hypertension
HRS-AKI
Hepatorenal syndrome with acute kidney injury
HVPG
Hepatic venous pressure gradient
INR / PT
International normalised ratio / prothrombin time
KDIGO
Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes
MASLD / MASH / MetALD
Metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease / steatohepatitis / with higher alcohol intake
MELD
Model for End-stage Liver Disease
NAC
N-acetylcysteine
NAPQI
N-acetyl-p-benzoquinone imine, the toxic acetaminophen metabolite
NSAID
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug
PK / PD
Pharmacokinetics / pharmacodynamics
RAAS
Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system
UGT / SULT
UDP-glucuronosyltransferase / sulfotransferase
ULN
Upper limit of normal
12. References
Items marked with a web address were retrieved and checked in October 2026. Textbook and journal entries follow the standard published editions and citations.
No.
Reference
R1
Hall JE, Hall ME. Guyton and Hall Textbook of Medical Physiology (current edition). Elsevier.
R2
Dooley JS, Lok ASF, Garcia-Tsao G, Pinzani M, eds. Sherlock's Diseases of the Liver and Biliary System. Wiley-Blackwell.
R3
Loscalzo J, et al., eds. Harrison's Principles of Internal Medicine. McGraw-Hill.
R4
Brunton LL, Knollmann BC, eds. Goodman and Gilman's The Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics. McGraw-Hill.
R5
LiverTox: Clinical and Research Information on Drug-Induced Liver Injury. Ibuprofen. NCBI Bookshelf NBK547845. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK547845/
R6
Zoubek ME, et al. Systematic review: ibuprofen-induced liver injury. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. https://cris.maastrichtuniversity.nl/en/publications/systematic-review-ibuprofen-induced-liver-injury
R7
Rinella ME, et al. A multisociety Delphi consensus statement on new fatty liver disease nomenclature. J Hepatol 2023;79(6):1542-1556. See also https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10824973/
R8
Kim WR, et al. MELD 3.0: the Model for End-Stage Liver Disease updated for the modern era. Gastroenterology 2021;161(6):1887-1895. https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8608337
R9
Kwo PY, Cohen SM, Lim JK. ACG clinical guideline: evaluation of abnormal liver chemistries. Am J Gastroenterol 2017;112:18-35.
R10
TOXCard: Acetaminophen toxicity and management. emDocs. https://www.emdocs.net/toxcard-acetaminophen-toxicity-and-management
R11
Rumack BH, Matthew H. Acetaminophen poisoning and toxicity. Pediatrics 1975;55:871-876. MDCalc: Acetaminophen overdose and NAC dosing. https://www.mdcalc.com/calc/568
R12
Angeli P, et al. Diagnosis and management of acute kidney injury in patients with cirrhosis: revised consensus recommendations of the International Club of Ascites. J Hepatol 2015;62:968-974. Biggins SW, et al. 2021 AASLD practice guidance on ascites, spontaneous bacterial peritonitis and hepatorenal syndrome. Hepatology 2021;74:1014-1048. Review: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10038893
R13
Rodriguez-Roisin R, et al. Pulmonary-hepatic vascular disorders (PHD). Eur Respir J 2004;24:861-880. Review: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC9403489/
R14
KDIGO Clinical Practice Guideline for Acute Kidney Injury. Kidney Int Suppl 2012;2:1-138.
R15
Mitchell JR, et al. Acetaminophen-induced hepatic necrosis. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1973;187:185-194.
R16
Bernal W, Wendon J. Acute liver failure. N Engl J Med 2013;369:2525-2534. O'Grady JG, et al. Early indicators of prognosis in fulminant hepatic failure. Gastroenterology 1989;97:439-445.
R17
Moreau R, et al. Acute-on-chronic liver failure is a distinct syndrome that develops in patients with acute decompensation of cirrhosis. Gastroenterology 2013;144:1426-1437.
R18
Pugh RNH, et al. Transection of the oesophagus for bleeding oesophageal varices. Br J Surg 1973;60:646-649. Kamath PS, et al. A model to predict survival in patients with end-stage liver disease. Hepatology 2001;33:464-470.
R19
Watkins PB, et al. Aminotransferase elevations in healthy adults receiving 4 grams of acetaminophen daily. JAMA 2006;296:87-93.
R20
Chalasani NP, et al. ACG clinical guideline: diagnosis and management of idiosyncratic drug-induced liver injury. Am J Gastroenterol 2021;116:878-898.

--- Renal_Agent_Framework.docx ---
RENAL AGENT
Renal Knowledge & Reasoning Framework
Design reference for a provenance-aware, multi-agent renal module in a physiological simulation sandbox
Scope
This document defines how the Renal Agent should inspect an authoritative physiological snapshot, detect renal patterns, link them to candidate mechanisms, grade risk, and label every conclusion by its evidential status (engine-simulated, evidence-only, illustrative, or unsupported). It also catalogues the renal conditions and cross-system interactions the agent should recognize, and proposes a ten-mechanism build order.
Design principles
Never diagnose kidney disease from a single number.
Never hard-code a disease to a fixed severity; the current patient state overrides the default label.
The numerical engine owns the physiology; agents interpret and communicate findings, they do not alter values such as creatinine.
Every finding carries provenance, coverage level and limitations.
Contents
Architectural Principles
The renal agent should not “diagnose kidney disease” from one number. It should inspect the authoritative physiological snapshot, detect renal patterns, connect them to possible mechanisms, grade risk, and clearly mark whether a conclusion is engine-simulated, evidence-only, illustrative, or unsupported.
Do not hard-code something such as IgA nephropathy = severe. The same disease can be mild in one patient and life-threatening in another. Use the labels below as a default risk/escalation potential, then let laboratory values, time course, comorbidities and complications determine the current severity. CKD risk is formally assessed using kidney function and albuminuria, while AKI severity is staged using creatinine and urine output (KDIGO).
Coverage labels
Label
Meaning
ENGINE_SIMULATED
The value or change is produced by the numerical physiology engine.
EVIDENCE_ONLY
Supported by clinical literature but not numerically modeled by the engine.
ILLUSTRATIVE
Shown for explanatory purposes; not a computed or evidenced result.
UNSUPPORTED
Cannot be concluded from the available snapshot, engine or evidence.
1. Risk Labels for the Renal AI
Three display levels are suggested:
AI level
Meaning in the sandbox
🟢 MILD / MONITOR
Limited abnormality, stable physiology, often reversible or manageable, no immediate organ-failure signal.
🟠 SEVERE / HIGH CONCERN
Significant renal injury or substantial progression risk; needs close monitoring or intervention.
🔴 HIGHLY RISKY / CRITICAL
Potential for rapid kidney failure, dangerous electrolyte or acid-base disturbance, sepsis, shock, pulmonary edema, dialysis requirement, or death.
The current patient state should override the default disease label.
Scenario
Displayed level
Kidney stone, 3 mm, no obstruction
🟢 MILD
Kidney stone causing unilateral obstruction
🟠 SEVERE
Obstructed infected kidney + sepsis
🔴 HIGHLY RISKY
Kidney stones themselves often do not permanently damage the kidneys when appropriately treated, but obstruction, infection, or loss of kidney function changes the risk substantially. (NIDDK)
2. Primary Kidney Diseases
This is the first major group the Renal Agent should know.
Renal condition
Main cause / mechanism
Important findings
Default risk
Acute kidney injury — prerenal
Reduced renal blood flow
Creatinine ↑, urine ↓, renal perfusion ↓
🟠
AKI — intrinsic renal
Direct nephron/glomerular/tubular injury
Creatinine ↑, abnormal urine, filtration ↓
🟠→🔴
AKI — postrenal
Urinary obstruction
Urine ↓, hydronephrosis, creatinine ↑
🟠→🔴
CKD
Persistent structural/function loss
eGFR ↓ and/or albuminuria
🟢→🔴 stage-dependent
Kidney failure
Very advanced loss of renal function
Severe filtration failure, complications
🔴
Diabetic kidney disease
Chronic hyperglycemic glomerular damage
Albuminuria, declining eGFR
🟠→🔴
Hypertensive nephropathy
Chronic vascular/glomerular pressure injury
Hypertension + eGFR decline
🟠→🔴
IgA nephropathy
IgA immune deposition
Hematuria, proteinuria
🟢→🔴
FSGS
Segmental glomerular scarring
Proteinuria, nephrotic syndrome
🟠→🔴
Membranous nephropathy
Immune-mediated GBM injury
Heavy proteinuria, edema
🟠→🔴
Minimal change disease
Podocyte dysfunction
Nephrotic proteinuria
🟠
Postinfectious glomerulonephritis
Immune response after infection
Hematuria, edema, hypertension
🟠
Rapidly progressive GN
Severe inflammatory glomerular injury
Rapid eGFR decline
🔴
Anti-GBM disease
Antibodies attack GBM
Rapid renal failure ± lung bleeding
🔴
ANCA-associated GN
Small-vessel autoimmune vasculitis
Hematuria, AKI, systemic vasculitis
🔴
Lupus nephritis
SLE immune-complex kidney injury
Proteinuria/hematuria/eGFR ↓
🟠→🔴
Nephrotic syndrome
Severe glomerular protein leak
Proteinuria, low albumin, edema
🟠→🔴
Nephritic syndrome
Glomerular inflammation
Hematuria, hypertension, oliguria
🟠→🔴
Acute tubular injury/necrosis
Ischemia or toxins
AKI, reduced tubular function
🟠→🔴
Acute interstitial nephritis
Often drug/immune related
AKI, inflammatory kidney injury
🟠
Chronic tubulointerstitial nephritis
Chronic toxins, drugs, reflux, metabolic disorders
Gradual CKD
🟠
Pyelonephritis
Usually ascending bacterial infection
Fever, flank pain, urinary signs
🟠
Complicated pyelonephritis
Infection + obstruction/comorbidity
AKI/sepsis risk
🔴
Renal abscess
Localized kidney infection
Fever, inflammation, renal injury
🔴
Polycystic kidney disease
Genetic cyst formation
Enlarged kidneys, HTN, CKD
🟠→🔴
Alport syndrome
Genetic basement-membrane disorder
Hematuria, progressive CKD
🟠→🔴
Fabry-related nephropathy
Lysosomal storage disorder
Proteinuria, CKD
🟠→🔴
Congenital renal dysplasia
Abnormal kidney development
Reduced nephron function
🟢→🔴
Renal hypoplasia
Small/underdeveloped kidneys
Reduced renal reserve
🟠
Solitary kidney
Congenital/acquired
Reduced reserve
🟢→🟠
Renal artery stenosis
Reduced arterial supply
Hypertension, renal ischemia
🟠→🔴
Renal artery thrombosis
Acute arterial occlusion
Renal ischemia/infarction
🔴
Renal vein thrombosis
Venous obstruction
Pain, hematuria, renal injury
🔴
Renal infarction
Embolus/thrombosis
Acute ischemic injury
🔴
Thrombotic microangiopathy
Small-vessel thrombosis
AKI + hemolysis + platelets ↓
🔴
Hemolytic uremic syndrome
Microangiopathic renal injury
AKI, anemia, thrombocytopenia
🔴
Renal papillary necrosis
Ischemia/toxins, diabetes, analgesics etc.
Hematuria, obstruction
🟠→🔴
Renal cortical necrosis
Severe ischemia/shock
Major acute renal failure
🔴
Nephrolithiasis
Urinary crystal/stone formation
Pain, hematuria
🟢
Obstructive nephropathy
Stone/tumor/prostate/stricture
Hydronephrosis, GFR ↓
🟠→🔴
Hydronephrosis
Urine-flow obstruction
Renal pelvic dilation
🟠
Reflux nephropathy
Vesicoureteral reflux/scarring
Recurrent infections, CKD
🟠
Renal tubular acidosis
Tubular acid-handling defect
Acidosis, abnormal K⁺
🟠
Fanconi syndrome
Proximal tubular dysfunction
Glucose/phosphate/amino-acid wasting
🟠
Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus
Kidney unresponsive to ADH
Polyuria, dehydration
🟠
Hyperoxaluria nephropathy
Oxalate deposition
Stones + renal damage
🟠→🔴
Urate nephropathy
Uric-acid crystal deposition
AKI/CKD
🟠→🔴
Myeloma cast nephropathy
Light-chain tubular injury
Rapid renal dysfunction
🔴
Amyloid nephropathy
Amyloid deposition
Proteinuria, nephrotic syndrome
🟠→🔴
Kidney malignancy affecting function
Tumor/invasion/obstruction
Hematuria, obstruction, renal loss
🟠→🔴
Diabetes and hypertension are the most common causes of CKD in adults. Other important causes include autoimmune disease, glomerular disorders, nephrotoxins, infections, stones with complications, polycystic disease, renal artery stenosis, sickle cell disease, myeloma, hepatorenal syndrome and cardiorenal syndrome. NIDDK specifically includes IgA nephropathy, FSGS, membranous nephropathy, minimal change disease, lupus nephritis and anti-GBM disease among important glomerular disorders. (NIDDK)
3. Cardiovascular Diseases That Can Damage the Kidney
This category is extremely important because Cardiovascular Agent → Renal Agent communication will frequently happen here.
Cardiovascular event / disease
Renal mechanism
Possible renal result
Risk
Chronic hypertension
Glomerular/vascular damage
CKD
🟠→🔴
Malignant/severe hypertension
Acute vascular injury
AKI
🔴
Heart failure
Renal perfusion ↓ + venous congestion
Cardiorenal syndrome
🔴
Cardiogenic shock
Cardiac output ↓ severely
Ischemic AKI
🔴
Myocardial infarction with low output
Renal perfusion ↓
AKI
🔴
Cardiac tamponade
Cardiac output ↓
Prerenal AKI
🔴
Severe arrhythmia
Output/perfusion ↓
AKI
🟠→🔴
Pulmonary embolism with hemodynamic compromise
Low output/venous pressure effects
AKI
🔴
Pulmonary hypertension / right HF
Renal venous congestion
GFR ↓
🟠→🔴
Atherosclerosis
Renal artery narrowing/atheroembolism
CKD/AKI
🟠→🔴
Aortic disease affecting renal arteries
Renal perfusion ↓
Renal ischemia
🔴
Reduced cardiac output is a recognized cause of prerenal AKI, including heart failure, cardiogenic shock, myocardial infarction, tamponade and severe pulmonary vascular disease. (Merck Manuals)
Example inter-agent message:
{
  "source_agent": "cardiovascular",
  "finding": "reduced_renal_perfusion_risk",
  "evidence": {
    "MAP": 58,
    "cardiac_output": 3.0
  }
}
Important: the cardiovascular agent does not change creatinine. The numerical engine owns that.
4. Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases Affecting the Kidneys
Disease / state
Kidney mechanism
Risk
Diabetes mellitus
Hyperglycemia damages glomeruli
🟠→🔴
Diabetic ketoacidosis
Severe dehydration/hypoperfusion
🔴
Hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state
Extreme osmotic diuresis/dehydration
🔴
Hypercalcemia
Vasoconstriction + stones/tubular injury
🟠→🔴
Hyperparathyroidism
Hypercalcemia/stones
🟠
Gout / hyperuricemia
Urate stones/crystal disease
🟠
Tumor lysis syndrome
Uric acid/phosphate precipitation
🔴
Severe obesity
Hyperfiltration, HTN, diabetes, FSGS risk
🟠
Metabolic syndrome
Diabetes/HTN/vascular injury
🟠
Adrenal insufficiency
Hypotension/volume loss
🟠→🔴
Severe hypothyroidism
Hemodynamic/GFR changes
🟠
Rhabdomyolysis
Myoglobin tubular toxicity
🔴
Diabetes damages renal filtering vessels over time and is a major cause of kidney disease. (NIDDK)
5. Liver Diseases Affecting the Renal System
This is an important Hepatic Agent → Renal Agent pathway.
Liver condition
Renal mechanism
Risk
Decompensated cirrhosis
Effective arterial volume ↓
🟠→🔴
Hepatorenal syndrome
Severe renal vasoconstriction in advanced liver disease
🔴
Acute liver failure
Hemodynamic/inflammatory abnormalities
🔴
Severe ascites
Altered effective circulating volume
🟠→🔴
Hepatitis B-associated nephropathy
Immune-complex disease
🟠→🔴
Hepatitis C-associated nephropathy
Immune/vasculitic glomerular damage
🟠→🔴
Decompensated liver disease is a recognized cause of renal hypoperfusion/AKI, and hepatorenal syndrome is specifically recognized as liver disease producing renal dysfunction. (Merck Manuals)
6. Respiratory Diseases Affecting the Kidneys
For the Respiratory Agent → Renal Agent interface:
Condition
Mechanism affecting kidney
Risk
Severe hypoxemia
Renal tissue oxygen delivery ↓
🟠→🔴
Respiratory failure
Hypoxia + hemodynamic disturbance
🔴
Severe COPD exacerbation
Hypoxemia/hypercapnia/hemodynamics
🟠→🔴
ARDS
Systemic inflammation + hypoxia
🔴
Pulmonary sepsis / pneumonia with shock
Hypotension/inflammation
🔴
Mechanical ventilation with adverse hemodynamics
Venous pressure/cardiac output changes
🟠
Pulmonary hemorrhage in anti-GBM disease
Shared autoimmune disease affects lung + kidney
🔴
Anti-GBM disease is particularly useful for a multi-agent demonstration because it can simultaneously produce glomerulonephritis and pulmonary bleeding, directly linking the renal and respiratory agents. Untreated disease can rapidly progress to renal and respiratory failure. (NIDDK)
7. Infection and Inflammation Affecting the Kidneys
Condition
Renal effect
Risk
Sepsis
Vasodilation, inflammation, microcirculatory injury
🔴
Septic shock
Severe hypoperfusion
🔴
UTI
Usually lower urinary tract initially
🟢
Pyelonephritis
Direct kidney infection
🟠
Pyelonephritis + sepsis
Infection + organ dysfunction
🔴
Endocarditis
Immune GN / embolic disease
🔴
Post-streptococcal GN
Immune-complex injury
🟠
HIV-associated nephropathy
Glomerular injury
🟠→🔴
HBV-associated GN
Immune-mediated
🟠
HCV-associated GN
Immune-mediated
🟠
COVID / severe systemic viral illness
Inflammation/hemodynamic injury
🟠→🔴
Kidney infection commonly begins as a lower UTI and ascends to the kidneys; severe cases can lead to sepsis, kidney scarring, CKD or kidney failure. (NIDDK)
8. Autoimmune and Systemic Diseases
Systemic disease
Kidney manifestation
Risk
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Lupus nephritis
🟠→🔴
ANCA vasculitis
Rapidly progressive GN
🔴
Anti-GBM disease
Crescentic GN
🔴
IgA vasculitis
IgA-mediated GN
🟠→🔴
Systemic sclerosis
Scleroderma renal crisis
🔴
Rheumatoid / systemic inflammatory disease
Amyloidosis/drug effects
🟠
Sjögren syndrome
Tubulointerstitial nephritis/RTA
🟠
Sarcoidosis
Interstitial nephritis/hypercalcemia
🟠
Antiphospholipid syndrome
Renal vascular thrombosis
🔴
9. Blood and Hematological Diseases Affecting the Kidneys
Disease
Kidney mechanism
Risk
Multiple myeloma
Light-chain/cast nephropathy
🔴
Sickle-cell disease
Ischemia/hyperfiltration/papillary damage
🟠→🔴
Hemolytic uremic syndrome
Thrombotic microangiopathy
🔴
TTP
Microvascular thrombosis
🔴
DIC
Renal microthrombosis + shock
🔴
Severe hemolysis
Pigment-related tubular injury
🟠→🔴
Leukemia / lymphoma
Infiltration/tumor lysis
🟠→🔴
Multiple myeloma, HUS/TTP and sickle-cell disease are among recognized systemic causes of chronic or acute kidney disease. (NIDDK)
10. Fluid-State Problems
These should be among the first implemented renal rules, because physiological engines are far better suited to fluid and hemodynamic simulation than to inventing disease-specific trajectories.
Stress event
Kidney mechanism
Risk
Mild dehydration
Renal perfusion slightly ↓
🟢
Moderate dehydration
GFR ↓, RAAS ↑
🟠
Severe dehydration
Prerenal AKI
🔴
Vomiting
Fluid/electrolyte loss
🟢→🔴
Diarrhea
Volume + bicarbonate/electrolyte loss
🟢→🔴
Hemorrhage
Circulating volume ↓
🔴
Major burns
Fluid shifts
🔴
Third-spacing
Effective volume ↓
🟠→🔴
Overdiuresis
Volume depletion
🟠
Fluid overload
Venous congestion
🟠→🔴
Shock
Severe renal hypoperfusion
🔴
Volume depletion, hemorrhage, GI losses, burns and low cardiac output are classical causes of prerenal AKI. (Merck Manuals)
11. Drugs and Toxins
These are best represented as engine-simulated only when the engine actually models the pharmacology; otherwise they are evidence-only.
Drug / exposure
Possible renal mechanism
Risk context
NSAIDs (ibuprofen, naproxen etc.)
Renal prostaglandin inhibition → afferent vasoconstriction
🟠; 🔴 with dehydration/CKD/HF
ACE inhibitors
Efferent arteriolar dilation
Usually therapeutic; AKI risk in susceptible states
ARBs
Same general hemodynamic issue
Context dependent
Aminoglycosides
Tubular toxicity
🟠→🔴
Vancomycin
Nephrotoxicity risk
🟠
Amphotericin B
Tubular injury
🟠→🔴
Cisplatin
Tubular toxicity
🟠→🔴
Calcineurin inhibitors
Renal vasoconstriction
🟠→🔴
Lithium
Chronic tubulointerstitial injury / NDI
🟠
Some PPIs
Interstitial nephritis association
🟠
Some antibiotics
AIN/crystal injury
🟠
Acyclovir
Crystal/tubular obstruction
🟠→🔴
Methotrexate at problematic exposure
Crystal nephropathy
🟠→🔴
Ethylene glycol
Oxalate nephropathy + systemic toxicity
🔴
Myoglobin from rhabdomyolysis
Pigment tubular injury
🔴
Iodinated contrast
AKI risk in susceptible contexts
Context dependent
NSAIDs and medications altering renal perfusion are specifically included among recognized causes of AKI. (Merck Manuals)
Worked example: ibuprofen with dehydration
Ibuprofen alone
       ↓
EVIDENCE:
NSAID renal hemodynamic effect
 
              +
 
Dehydration
       ↓
ENGINE:
effective circulating volume ↓
renal perfusion ↓
 
              ↓
 
RENAL AGENT
"Combined renal hypoperfusion risk increased."
If the physiology engine (Pulse) does not contain an ibuprofen PK/PD renal model, the system should not invent a number such as eGFR = 91 → 63 attributable to ibuprofen. Instead:
Statement
Coverage
Volume-induced renal changes
ENGINE_SIMULATED
NSAID-associated additional renal risk
EVIDENCE_ONLY
Exact NSAID-attributable ΔeGFR
UNSUPPORTED
12. Kidney Disease Damages Other Systems
The interaction runs in both directions: OTHER SYSTEM → KIDNEY, but also KIDNEY → OTHER SYSTEM. The Renal Agent should therefore publish findings that other agents can inspect.
Renal abnormality
Other system affected
Consequence
Na⁺/water retention
Cardiovascular
Hypertension
Fluid overload
Respiratory
Pulmonary edema
Fluid overload
Cardiovascular
Heart failure worsening
Hyperkalemia
Cardiac
Dangerous arrhythmias
Hypokalemia
Cardiac/muscle
Arrhythmias, weakness
Metabolic acidosis
Respiratory
Compensatory hyperventilation
Metabolic acidosis
Cardiovascular
Reduced cardiac function in severe cases
Reduced EPO
Hematological
Anemia
Anemia
Cardio/respiratory
Increased cardiac workload, dyspnea
Phosphate retention
Bone/endocrine
CKD mineral-bone disorder
Reduced calcitriol
Bone/endocrine
Calcium/PTH abnormalities
Secondary hyperparathyroidism
Bone
Bone resorption
Uremia
Neurologic
Confusion/encephalopathy
Uremia
GI
Nausea/anorexia
Uremia
Cardiovascular
Pericarditis in advanced disease
Protein loss
Whole body
Edema/malnutrition
Nephrotic syndrome
Hematologic
Thrombosis risk
CKD
Cardiovascular
Increased CVD risk
CKD complications become more common and severe as eGFR falls and include cardiovascular disease, anemia, nutritional problems and mineral/bone abnormalities. Kidney damage also reduces EPO production, contributing to anemia, particularly in advanced CKD. CKD mineral-bone disorder involves altered phosphate, calcium, calcitriol and PTH physiology and can affect both bones and the cardiovascular system. (NIDDK)
13. Renal Agent Input Variables
The Renal Agent should be able to inspect at least the following, which is far better than creatinine and GFR alone because kidneys are tightly coupled to circulation, fluid balance, electrolytes and acid-base physiology.
Group
Variables
Renal
eGFR, serum creatinine, BUN, urine output, urine output (mL/kg/h), UACR / proteinuria, hematuria, renal perfusion, renal blood flow
Hemodynamic
SBP, DBP, MAP, heart rate, cardiac output, blood volume, fluid balance
Electrolytes
Na⁺, K⁺, Cl⁻, HCO₃⁻, Ca²⁺, phosphate, Mg²⁺
Other
Blood glucose, albumin, hemoglobin, pH, lactate, SpO₂, temperature
Context
Age, mass, diabetes, hypertension, heart failure, liver failure, infection, sepsis, dehydration, hemorrhage, known CKD, baseline eGFR, baseline creatinine, medications
14. AKI Staging Rules
This is one place where objective staging exists rather than arbitrary AI scoring. KDIGO staging includes approximately:
AKI state
Creatinine criterion
Urine criterion
Sandbox display
Stage 1
≥0.3 mg/dL rise or 1.5–1.9× baseline
<0.5 mL/kg/h for 6–12 h
🟠
Stage 2
2.0–2.9× baseline
<0.5 mL/kg/h ≥12 h
🟠 severe
Stage 3
≥3× baseline, very high creatinine, or renal replacement therapy
<0.3 mL/kg/h ≥24 h or anuria ≥12 h
🔴
Instead of a fixed threshold such as:
if creatinine > 2:
    renal_state = "red"
use a baseline-relative, stage-driven rule:
creatinine_ratio = current_creatinine / baseline_creatinine
 
if aki_stage == 3:
    renal_state = "RED"
elif aki_stage in [1, 2]:
    renal_state = "AMBER"
Baseline matters enormously.
15. Cause Tree for the Renal Agent
This is probably the single most useful representation for training the agent. The prerenal / intrinsic / postrenal distinction is the standard high-level way of organizing causes of AKI (Merck Manuals).
RENAL DYSFUNCTION
│
├── PRERENAL
│   ├── Dehydration
│   ├── Vomiting
│   ├── Diarrhea
│   ├── Hemorrhage
│   ├── Burns
│   ├── Sepsis / vasodilation
│   ├── Heart failure
│   ├── Cardiogenic shock
│   ├── Liver failure
│   └── Renal-hemodynamic medications
│
├── INTRINSIC RENAL
│   ├── Glomerular
│   │   ├── IgA nephropathy
│   │   ├── Lupus nephritis
│   │   ├── FSGS
│   │   ├── Membranous nephropathy
│   │   ├── Anti-GBM
│   │   └── ANCA vasculitis
│   ├── Tubular
│   │   ├── Ischemic ATI/ATN
│   │   ├── Nephrotoxins
│   │   ├── Rhabdomyolysis
│   │   └── Tumor lysis
│   ├── Interstitial
│   │   ├── Drug-induced AIN
│   │   ├── Infection
│   │   └── Autoimmune disease
│   └── Vascular
│       ├── Malignant hypertension
│       ├── TMA/HUS/TTP
│       ├── Renal artery disease
│       └── Renal infarction
│
└── POSTRENAL
    ├── Stones
    ├── BPH
    ├── Prostate cancer
    ├── Bladder tumor
    ├── Ureter tumor
    ├── Blood clot
    ├── Urethral stricture
    ├── Neurogenic bladder
    └── Catheter obstruction
16. Provenance for Every Finding
Every renal finding should carry a structured provenance record. An engine-backed finding:
{
  "finding": "renal_hypoperfusion",
  "severity": "severe",
  "confidence": 0.91,
 
  "observations": {
    "MAP_mmHg": 58,
    "urine_output_ml_kg_hr": 0.42,
    "volume_state": "depleted"
  },
 
  "possible_causes": [
    "volume_depletion",
    "low_mean_arterial_pressure"
  ],
 
  "affected_systems": [
    "renal",
    "cardiovascular"
  ],
 
  "coverage": "engine_simulated",
 
  "evidence_ids": [],
 
  "limitations": [
    "etiology_not_proven_from_snapshot_alone"
  ]
}
Whereas an NSAID rule might return:
{
  "finding": "nsaid_associated_renal_risk",
  "severity": "severe",
 
  "context": [
    "ibuprofen_exposure",
    "volume_depletion"
  ],
 
  "coverage": "evidence_only",
 
  "limitations": [
    "drug_induced_delta_gfr_not_numerically_modeled"
  ]
}
That distinction is extremely important.
Recommended Build Hierarchy
Do not begin by encoding hundreds of obscure renal diseases. Start with these ten core mechanisms:
Renal hypoperfusion / prerenal AKI
Intrinsic renal injury
Urinary obstruction
Chronic kidney disease
Glomerular protein loss
Infection / pyelonephritis
Fluid overload
Electrolyte disturbance, especially potassium
Acid-base dysfunction
Cardiorenal / hepatorenal / drug-related renal risk
These mechanisms cover an enormous share of clinically meaningful renal interactions. Diseases such as diabetes, heart failure, sepsis, NSAID exposure, lupus or stones then become causal/context nodes feeding the mechanisms, rather than dozens of unrelated hard-coded rules. That structure makes the Renal Agent far more scientifically defensible and far easier to train, test and explain.
Sources referenced
KDIGO — AKI staging and CKD risk classification
NIDDK — kidney disease causes, complications, stones, infection, glomerular disorders
Merck Manuals — AKI classification and prerenal causes

